---
output:
  html_document: default
  pdf_document: default
---
## Abstract {.page_break_before}

Biomedical sciences have been revolutionized by substantial advances in analyzing patient samples using high-throughput data generation methods. These technologies provide a rich portrait of genes, cellular pathways, and cell types involved in complex phenotypes. Machine learning is a helpful ally in extracting disease-relevant patterns from these high dimensional datasets. However, machine learning methods require a large number of samples to identify reproducible and biologically meaningful patterns. In rare diseases, biological specimens and consequently data, are limited due to the rarity of the condition. Such limitation is also of concern beyond rare diseases: similar challenges exist in precision medicine where individual data points are unique occurrences of particular health statuses within the population. In this perspective, we outline the challenges and emerging methodological solutions for using computational approaches in underpowered settings to encourage the careful adoption of powerful machine learning techniques in rare disease and precision medicine. 

#### **Collaborative strategies surmount challenges in data generation and diagnosis to power robust analyses in rare diseases:** 
This section will outline the various challenges and opportunities related to data generation and diagnosis in rare diseases. Due to the rarity of patients, patient samples need to be collected and processed at different clinics and locations. Any well-powered computational analysis necessitates the harmonization of these differently processed samples into one dataset. Coordinated efforts in generating and sharing data can go a long way in minimizing the technical differences between studies1. For retrospective analyses of samples bearing technical differences, rigorous normalization methods are important for harmonization. Additionally, sample-centric methodologies like gene set variation analyses may be helpful for appropriate interpretation of the harmonized data2. 

#### **Careful selection of methods supports successful implementation of machine learning in rare diseases:** 
Some of the inherent challenges posed by low sample numbers in rare diseases, are further aggravated by disease heterogeneity, poorly defined disease phenotypes, and a lack of control (i.e. normal) data. This necessitates careful selection of machine learning techniques for application in rare disease data. In this section, we will discuss methodological considerations like bootstrapping sample data, deep learning with regularization methods, and hyper-ensemble techniques that can minimize misinterpretation of the data3,4. 

#### **Integration of prior knowledge and strategic implementation of machine learning extracts important biological insights in rare diseases:** 
This section will highlight promising approaches for extracting biological insights from rare disease data. We will discuss techniques like transfer-learning, representation learning, cascade learning, integrative analysis, and knowledge-graph creation that aim to extract patterns from underpowered datasets like rare diseases to generate testable hypotheses5–9.

We will conclude by discussing the potential of the above-mentioned approaches in rare diseases, precision medicine, and other biomedical areas where data is scarce.
