## Synopsis {.page_break_before}

(Instructions: Describe the background, basic structure of the article, list material to be covered indicating depth of coverage, how they are logically arranged, include recent pubs in the area, 300-500 words)

The advent of high-throughput profiling methods such as genomics and other technologies has accelerated basic research and made deep molecular characterization of patient samples routine. 
These approaches provide a rich portrait of genes, molecular pathways, and cell types involved in complex phenotypes. 
Machine learning can be a useful tool to extract disease-relevant patterns from high dimensional datasets. 
However, depending on the complexity of the biological question, machine learning often requires a large number of samples to identify recurrent and biologically meaningful patterns. 
Rare diseases are inherently limited in clinical cases and thus have few samples to study. 
Precision medicine also presents a similar challenge, where patients with common diseases are partitioned into small subsets of patients based on particular characteristics. 
In this perspective, we outline the challenges and emerging solutions for using machine learning in the context of small sample sets, specifically that of rare diseases. 
Advances in machine learning methods for rare disease are likely to be informative for applications beyond rare diseases in which sample sizes are small but datasets are complex (e.g., using genomics data for predictive modeling in precision medicine). 
We propose that the methods community prioritizes the development of machine learning techniques for rare disease research.
