### Knowledge graphs for rare disease

An intrinsic constraint in the study of rare disease is the availability of large, normalized datasets. 
This limits our ability to study genotype-phenotype relationships or other key attributes of rare diseases. 
A potentially powerful strategy for evaluating genotype-phenotype relationships or repurposing drugs when large datasets are scarce or nonexistent is to develop and use knowledge graphs.
Knowledge graphs integrate related-but-different data types, creating a rich and complex data source. 
Examples of well-known public biomedical knowledge graphs and graph frameworks that could be useful in the rare disease context include the Monarch Graph Database[@doi:10.1093/nar/gkw1128], hetionet[@doi:10.7554/eLife.26726], PheKnowLator[@doi:10.1101/2020.04.30.071407], and the Global Network of Biomedical Relationships[@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/bty114]. 
These graphs connect information like genetic, functional, chemical, clinical, and ontological data to enable the end user to explore many types of data and their relationships with disease phenotypes whether through manual review[@doi:10.1093/database/baaa015] or computational methods[@doi:10.1101/727925; @doi:10.1186/s12911-019-0938-1]. 
In the academic rare disease space, there a few pioneering examples of machine learning-based mining of knowledge graphs to repurpose drugs[@doi:10.1101/727925] and classify rare diseases[@doi:10.1186/s12911-019-0938-1].
These studies make it clear that there are some challenges in using machine learning in graph databases in rare disease.
For example, these papers rely on a gold standard dataset to validate the performance of the models; often, there are not robust gold standard datasets available for individual rare diseases.
These methods also evaluate a broad swath of rare diseases in a relatively unguided manner, rather than interrogating a pre-defined disease of interest.
Consequently, it is not yet clear how effective these approaches, and knowledge graphs in general, are in studying a specific disease of interest; more work needs to be done to identify methods that can provide actionable insights for a specific rare disease application. 
Beyond the aforementioned studies, there are very few examples of studies in the public domain that leverage knowledge graphs to characterize rare disease. 
However, private entities (e.g. healx, Boehringer Ingelheim, DrugBankPlus) have established partnerships and are performing an undisclosed amount of work to create and explore proprietary rare disease knowledge graphs for machine learning-based drug discovery applications.  
The formation of private companies pursuing this idea, as well as the availability of several public knowledge graphs with relevance to rare disease, suggests to us that this is a likely fruitful but generally untapped area of rare disease research in the public sphere. 
More work needs to be done to assess 1) which graph networks and network features best capture the salient information about rare diseases, 2) the utility of an array of knowledge graph analysis methodologies (such as graph neural nets, reinforcement learning approaches, and adversarial learning approaches)[doi:10.1109/TKDE.2020.2981333] to obtain actionable insights about rare diseases and 3) which problems - like drug discovery, identification of novel rare diseases, or assessment of genotype-phenotype relationships - can be meaningfully interrogated using machine learning of knowledge graphs.
