### Techniques that build on prior knowledge and indirectly related data are necessary for many rare disease applications {.page_break_before}

#### Knowledge graphs 

An intrinsic constraint in studying rare diseases is the lack of large, normalized datasets, which limits our ability to study key attributes of rare diseases. 
A potentially powerful strategy for evaluating genotype-phenotype relationships or repurposing drugs when large datasets are scarce is to use knowledge graphs.
Knowledge graphs integrate related-but-different data types, creating a rich data source. 
Examples of public biomedical knowledge graphs and frameworks that could be useful in rare disease include the Monarch Graph Database[@doi:10.1093/nar/gkw1128], hetionet[@doi:10.7554/eLife.26726], PheKnowLator[@doi:10.1101/2020.04.30.071407], and the Global Network of Biomedical Relationships[@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/bty114]. 
These graphs connect information like genetic, functional, chemical, clinical, and ontological data to enable the exploration of relationships of data with disease phenotypes through manual review[@doi:10.1093/database/baaa015] or computational methods[@doi:10.1101/727925; @doi:10.1186/s12911-019-0938-1]. 

In the academic rare disease space, there a few pioneering examples of ML-based mining of knowledge graphs to repurpose drugs[@doi:10.1101/727925] and classify rare diseases[@doi:10.1186/s12911-019-0938-1].
These studies make it clear that there are some challenges in using machine learning using graph databases in rare disease.
For example, these papers rely on a gold standard dataset to validate the performance of the models; often, there are not robust gold standard datasets available for individual rare diseases.
They also evaluate rare diseases in an unbiased manner, rather than interrogating a specific disease of interest.
Consequently, it is not yet clear how effective these approaches, and knowledge graphs in general, are in studying a specific disease of interest; more work needs to be done to identify methods that can provide actionable insights for a specific rare disease application. 

Beyond the aforementioned studies, there are few examples of studies in the public domain that leverage knowledge graphs to characterize rare disease. 
Private entities (e.g. healx, Boehringer Ingelheim, DrugBankPlus) are performing an undisclosed amount of work to create proprietary rare disease knowledge graphs for ML-based drug discovery applications.  
The existence of private companies pursuing this idea, as well as the availability of several public knowledge graphs with relevance to rare disease, suggests to us that this is a likely fruitful and untapped area of rare disease research in the public sphere. 
More work needs to be done to assess 1) which graphs and graph features capture the salient information about rare diseases, 2) the utility of ML methods to obtain actionable insights about rare diseases and 3) which problems - like drug discovery, identification of novel rare diseases, or assessment of genotype-phenotype relationships - can be interrogated using ML of knowledge graphs.


#### Wisdom of the crowd: rare disease applications of ensemble methods

Implementing machine learning on data with low sample size and high label uncertainty can lead to unstable predictions. 
In such cases various machine learning methods together (also called _ensemble learning_) can help increase accuracy and stability of the predictions.
Ensemble learning can use multiple similar approaches stitched together to reach a consensus, or can be a collection of different approaches that perform better compared to any single algorithm.
For example, ensemble learning methods like random forests use bootstrap aggregation (or _bagging_) of independent decision trees that use similar parameters but different paths to form a consensus about the important predictive features hidden in the dataset [@doi:10.1186/1472-6947-13-134, @doi:10.1023/A:1010933404324, @doi:10.1214/aos/1031689014, @doi:10.1177/2045894019890549, @doi:10/btzfh6].
However, successful application of consensus based ensemble learning requires "gold standard" data where the diagnosis or label of a data point in the training dataset has very little uncertainty (or "label-noise") associated with it [@doi:10.1093/jamia/ocw028]. 
In most cases of rare disease, due to the inherent nature of being less defined, the symptoms as well as any underlying biology comes with a reasonable amount label-noise leading to a _silver standard_ dataset[@doi:10.1109/TNNLS.2013.2292894, @doi:10.1093/jamia/ocw028].
In such datasets, the limited success of the _bagging_ approach has led to the use of ensemble learning or _cascade learning_, where multiple methods leveraging distinct underlying assumptions are used in tandem and augmented with algorithms like AdaBoost (_boosting_) to capture stable patterns existing in the silver standard data and reduce uncertainty [@doi:10.1109/CVPR.2001.990537, @doi:10.1007/978-3-540-75175-5_16, @doi:10.1109/ICPR.2004.1334680].
A variation of cascade learning implemented to identify rare disease patients from electronic health records (EHR) from the general population utilized independent steps for feature extraction (using word2vec [@arXiv:1301.3781v3]), preliminary prediction (ensemble of decision trees with penalization for excessive tree-depth), and prediction refinement (using similarity of data points to resolve sample labels) [@pmid:30815073].
This cascade learner benefited from the independence of the feature extraction step and the prediction refinement step from the preliminary classification of the labeled dataset to find stable patterns and perform better than other ensemble methods when implemented on this silver standard dataset.

In datasets with multiple classes, most cascade classifiers follow a _one-classifier-at-a-time_ approach where algorithms at each level predict all classes involved.
But instances where the need for high prediction accuracy for one class outweighs other classes, further modification of the cascade learning efforts is required.
An example of such modification was implemented for triaging psychiatric patients where the identification of one class of psychiatric patients ("severe") far outweighed the need for optimized overall classification accuracy [@pmid:30380082].
Due to the requirements of the problem, a _one-class-at-a-time_ cascade learning approach was adopted, where at each stage a binary classifier was used to predict a specific class against all others.
The final model implemented all models together each identifying one class sequentially and the union of the predictions of all the different models as the final prediction.
The cascade classifiers using the one-class-at-a-time approach were found to perform better than multi-class ensemble classifiers in most cases.

Thus ensemble learning can be helpful in producing stable predictions from rare disease data, but the choice of using bagging, boosting, independent algorithmic steps, or one-class-at-a-time approach depends on the nature of the prediction question.

#### Representation learning

Representation learning, also called feature learning, is the process of learning features from raw data, where a feature is an individual variable.
An algorithm or approach will construct features as part of training and, in a supervised application, use those features to predict labels on input data. 
Using an example from transcriptomics, an unsupervised method such as matrix factorization can be used to extract a low-dimensional representation of the gene-level data, learning features that are a combination of input genes' expression levels [@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btq503; @doi:10.1186/s13059-020-02021-3].
Low-dimensional representations trained on a collection of transcriptomic data can then be used as input to supervised machine learning methods [@doi:10.1186/s12859-020-3427-8]. 
Supervised neural networks used in medical imaging studies [@doi:10.1016/j.procs.2016.07.014] (reviewed in [@doi:10.1098/rsif.2017.0387]), which are trained to predict labels or classes, are also an example of representation learning. 
Learned features in the medical imaging domain may be a series of edges representing a blood vessel formation that discriminates between disease states.
Features learned from transcriptomic data could be coordinated sets of genes involved in a biological process that are descriptive in some way [@doi:10.1038/s41467-020-14666-6].

In the rare disease domain, Dincer et al. leveraged publicly available acute myeloid leukemia (AML) gene expression data to improve the prediction of _in vitro_ drug responses [@doi:10.1101/278739]. 
The authors trained a variational autoencoder (VAE) on AML data that had been collected over time without the phenotypic information they were interested in (drug response). 
(A VAE is an unsupervised neural network that learns a series of representations from data.)
The authors used the learned attributes to encode a low-dimensional representation of held-out AML data with phenotype labels of interest, and used this low-dimensional representation as input to a classifier that predicted _in vitro_ drug response.

Representation learning tends to be data-intensive; many samples are required.
Though there were over 6500 AML samples from many different studies used as part of the training set in Dincer et al. [@doi:10.1101/278739], we expect that in other rare diseases considerably fewer samples will be available or may be from different tissues in systemic diseases.
The study by Dincer and colleagues highlights another challenge: samples collected as part of multiple studies may not be associated with the deep phenotypic information that would maximize their scientific value.
In the next section, we will introduce methods or approaches that may be more broadly useful in rare diseases; representation learning underlies many of them.

#### Transfer, multitask, and few-shot learning

We focus on a series of approaches that are centered on the following concept: to realize the potential of machine learning for biological discovery in rare diseases, we often cannot study an individual rare disease alone as samples are limited.
Instead, we can build on prior knowledge and large volumes of data that do not directly assay our disease of interest, but are similar enough to be valuable for discovery.
We can leverage shared features, whether they are normal developmental processes that are aberrant in disease or an imaging anomaly present in rare and common diseases, for advancing our understanding.
Methods that leverage shared features include transfer learning, multitask learning, and few-shot learning approaches. 

##### Transfer learning

Transfer learning is an approach where a model trained for one task or domain (source domain) is applied to another, typically related task or domain (target domain).
Transfer learning can be supervised (one or both of the source and target domains have labels), or unsupervised (both domains are unlabeled).
Though there are multiple types of transfer learning, we will focus on feature-representation-transfer [@doi:10.1109/TKDE.2009.191] here. 
Feature-representation-transfer approaches learn representations from the source domain and apply them to a target domain [@doi:10.1109/TKDE.2009.191].
This concept is embodied in Dincer et al., where features are learned from unlabeled AML data and then used to encode a low-dimensional representation of AML data with _in vitro_ drug response labels [@doi:10.1101/278739].
The authors then used this low-dimensional representation as input to predict drug response labels–a supervised example.

In an unsupervised case, Taroni et al. trained a Pathway-Level Information ExtractoR (PLIER) [@doi:10.1038/s41592-019-0456-1] on a large generic collection of human transcriptomic data (recount2 [@doi:10.1038/nbt.3838]) and used the latent variables learned by the model to describe transcriptomic data from the unseen rare diseases antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA)-associated vasculitis (AAV) and medulloblastoma in an approach termed MultiPLIER [@doi:10.1016/j.cels.2019.04.003].
(Here "unseen" refers to the fact that these diseases were not in the training set.)
PLIER is a matrix factorization approach that takes prior knowledge in the form of gene sets or pathways and gene expression data as input; some latent variables learned by the model will align with input gene sets  [@doi:10.1038/s41592-019-0456-1].
We demonstrated that training on larger collections of randomly selected samples produced models that captured a larger proportion of input gene sets and better distinguished closely related signals, which suggests that larger training sets produced models that are more suitable for biological discovery [@doi:10.1016/j.cels.2019.04.003].

Though models trained on generic compendia had appealing properties, that alone does not guarantee suitability for describing rare diseases.
We must examine the relevance of learned features to the disease under study.
In Taroni et al., we found that the expression of latent variables that could be matched between the MultiPLIER model and a dataset-specific model were well-correlated, particularly when latent variables were associated with input gene sets [@doi:10.1016/j.cels.2019.04.003].
Despite the absence of AAV from the training set, MultiPLIER was able to learn a latent variable where the genes with the highest contributions encode antigens that the antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA) form against in AAV and with higher expression in more severe disease [@doi:10.1002/art.27398].
The utility of this approach stems from the fact that biological processes are often _shared_ between conditions–the same ANCA antigen genes are components of neutrophilic granule development that is likely captured or assayed in the collection of transcriptomic data used for training.
MultiPLIER has additional attributes that make it practical for studying rare diseases: latent variables that are not associated with input gene sets may capture technical noise separately from biological signal and we can use one model to describe multiple datasets instead of reconciling output from multiple models (see _05.heterogeneity.md_).

Taken together, DeepProfile [@doi:10.1101/278739] and MultiPLIER [@doi:10.1016/j.cels.2019.04.003] suggest transfer learning can be beneficial for studying rare diseases. 
In the natural images field, researchers have demonstrated that the transferability of features depends on relatedness of tasks [@arxiv:1411.1792].
The limits of transfer learning for and the concept of relatedness in high-dimensional biomedical data assaying rare diseases are open research questions.
In the authors' opinion, selecting an appropriate model for a given task and evaluations that are well-aligned with a research goal are crucial for applying these approaches in rare diseases.

##### Multitask and few-shot learning
 
Where transfer learning can be supervised or unsupervised, the related approaches multitask and few-shot learning are forms of supervised learning that generally rely on deep neural networks.
Multitask learning is an approach where classifiers are learned for _related tasks_ at the same time using a shared representation [@doi:10.1023/A:1007379606734].
Few-shot learning is the generalization of a model trained on related data and tasks to a new task with limited labeled data (e.g., the detection of a patient with a rare disease from a low number of examples of that rare disease). 
As with transfer learning, multitask and few-shot learning can be applied in situations where there are insufficient data for a given condition.
Like rare disease research, drug discovery suffers from a relatively small amount of data for a given task.
We highlight a few applications of multitask or few-shot learning in the drug discovery space, in addition to rare disease or condition research, to illustrate key takeaways.

Multitask neural networks that predict multiple tasks simultaneously are generally thought to improve performance over models that make predictions for a single task by learning a shared representation and effectively being exposed to more training data than the single task case [@doi:10.1023/A:1007379606734; @arxiv:1606.08793].
Kearnes, Goldman, and Pande set out to examine the effects of dataset size and task relatedness on multitask learning performance improvements ("multitask effect") in an industrial drug discovery setting [@arxiv:1606.08793].
The authors found that the multitask performance gains were highly dataset-specific: smaller datasets tended to benefit most from multitask learning and the addition of more training data did not guarantee improved performance for multitask models.
In predicting phenotypes from EHR data, Ding et al. demonstrated that multitask neural networks outperformed single-task networks for predicting complex rare phenotypes but not common phenotypes [@arxiv:1808.03331].
Liu et al. developed a method to train long short-term memory networks, a type of recurrent neural network, to predict mortality in rare diseases using EHR data as input [@arxiv:2004.05318v2].
Their method, Ada-SiT (Adaptation to Similar Tasks), was specifically designed for many tasks with insufficient data and allowed for task similarity to be measured during training.

Few-shot learning, also referred to as one-shot learning, relies on using prior knowledge to generalize to new prediction tasks where there are a low number of examples [@arxiv:1904.05046v3], where a distance metric is learned from input data and used to compare new examples for prediction [@doi:10.1021/acscentsci.6b00367].
Altae-Tran et al. developed a method for predicting small molecule activity that learned a meaningful distance over compounds [@doi:10.1021/acscentsci.6b00367].
However, the authors results suggested underperformance of one-shot learning methods relative to baseline random forest models when structural similiarity could not be exploited and did not show support for generalization of models trained on very different contexts from the target task.
Quellec et al. presented a few-shot learning approach for detecting rare pathologies in fundus photographs [@arxiv:1907.09449v3].
The authors train a convolutional neural network (CNN) to predict common pathologies, which tends to cluster similar conditions in feature space; the learned feature space is used to train a probabilistic model for each rare pathology.
This approach outperformed multitask learning, which suggests few-shot learning provides some advantages when training to predict common conditions simultaneously results in a loss of performance [@arxiv:1907.09449v3].  

Multitask and few-shot learning are comprised of a variety of approaches and architectures that are beyond this scope of this work.
As with transfer learning, the utility of these approaches to rare disease research is an open question and is likely to be highly dependent on dataset availability and research goals. 
