### Outlook

Throughout this perspective, we highlighted various challenges in applying ML methods to rare disease data as well as examples of approaches that address these challenges.
Small sample size, while significant, is not the only roadblock towards application of ML in rare disease data.
The high dimensionality of modern data requires creative approaches, such as learning new representations of the data, to manage the curse of dimensionality.
Leveraging prior knowledge and transfer learning methods to appropriately interpret data is also required.
Furthermore, we posit that researchers applying machine learning methods on rare disease data should use techniques that increase confidence (i.e., bootstrapping) and penalize complexity of the resultant models (i.e., regularization) to enhance the generalizability of their work. 

All of the approaches highlighted in this perspective come with weaknesses that may undermine investigators' confidence in using these techniques for rare disease research.
We believe that the challenges in applying ML to rare disease are opportunities for data generation and method development going forward.
In particular, we identified two areas where that that the field should explore to increase the utility of machine learning in rare disease.

_Emphasis on not just "more n" but "more meaningful n"_

Mindful addition of data is key for powering the next generation of analysis in rare disease data.
While there are many techniques to collate rare data from different sources, low-quality data may hurt the end goal even if it adds to the size of the dataset.
In our experience, collaboration with domain experts has proved to be critical in gaining insight into potential sources of variation in the datasets.
An anecdotal example from the authors' personal experience: conversations with a rare disease clinician revealed that samples in a particular tumor dataset were collected using vastly different surgical techniques (laser ablation and excision vs standard excision). 
This information that was not readily available to non-experts, but was obvious the clinician. 
Such instances underline the fact that continuous collaboration with domain experts is needed to generate robust datasets in the future.[TODO: I stripped a lot of details from this anecdote, because I would like the participants (other than us) to remain relatively anonymous, and I am not trying to appears as if I am criticizing people who are sharing data if it is not perfect. The todo is - at the current level of detail, is this still worth including?]

In addition to sample scarcity, there is a dearth of comprehensive phenotypic-genotypic databases in rare disease.
Rare disease studies that collect genomic and phenotypic data are becoming more common. [@doi:10.1038/nrg3555; @doi:10.1038/nrg.2017.116; @doi:10.1056/NEJMra1711801]
However, an important next step is to develop comprehensive genomics-based genotype-phenotype databases that prioritize clinical and genomics data standards in order to fuel interpretation of features extracted using ML methods.
Finally, mindful sharing of data with proper metadata and attribution to enable prompt data reuse is of utmost important in building datasets that can be of great value in rare disease. [@https://www.nature.com/articles/s41576-020-0257-5]

_Development of methods that reliably support mechanistic interrogation of specific rare diseases_

The majority of ML methods for rare disease that we have investigated are applied to classification tasks. 
Conversely, we've found few examples of methodologies that interrogate biological mechanisms of rare diseases. 
This is likely a consequence of a dearth of methods that can tolerate the constraints imposed by rare disease research such as phenotypic heterogeneity and limited data.
An intentional push towards developing methods or analytical workflows that address this will be critical to apply machine learning approaches to rare disease data.

Method development with rare disease applications in mind requires the developers to bear the responsibility of ensuring that the resulting model is trustworthy.
The field of natural language processing has a few examples of how this can be achieved.[@doi:10.18653/v1/N16-3020, @doi:10.18653/v1/P19-1073]
One way to increase trust in a developed model is by helping users understand the behavior of the developed model through providing explanations regarding why a certain model made certain predictions.[@doi:10.18653/v1/N16-3020]
Another approach is to provide robust _error analysis_ for newly developed models to help users understand the strengths and weaknesses of a model.[@doi:10.18653/v1/P19-1073; @https://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/abs/10.1162/COLI_a_00072; @doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/bth060]
Adoption of these approaches into biomedical ML is quickly becoming necessary as machine learning approaches become mainstream in research and clinical settings.

Finally, methods that can reliably integrate disparate datasets will likely always remain a need in rare disease research. 
To facilitate such analyses in rare disease, methods that rely on finding structural correspondences between datasets ("anchors") may be able to transform the status-quo of using machine learning methods in rare disease.[@https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W06-1615; @https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.5555/2283516.2283652; @doi:10.1016/j.cell.2019.05.031] 
We speculate that this an important and burgeoning area of research, and we are optimistic about the future of applying machine learning approaches to rare diseases.
