### Build upon prior knowledge and indirectly related data {.page_break_before}

Rare diseases often lack large, normalized datasets, limiting our ability to study key attributes of these diseases. 
One strategy to overcome this is to integrate and explore rare disease information alongside other knowledge by combining a variety of different data types. 
By using several data modalities (such as curated pathways, genetic data, or other data types), it may be possible to gain a better understanding of rare diseases (e.g., identifying novel genotype-phenotype relationships or opportunities for drug repurposing).
Knowledge graphs (KGs) which integrate related-but-different data types, provide a rich multimodal data source (e.g., Monarch Graph Database [@doi:10.1093/nar/gkw1128], hetionet [@doi:10.7554/elife.26726], PheKnowLator [@doi:10.1101/2020.04.30.071407], and the Global Network of Biomedical Relationships [@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/bty114], Orphanet [@http://www.orpha.net]). 
These graphs connect genetic, functional, chemical, clinical, and ontological data so that relationships of data with disease phenotypes can be explored through manual review [@doi:10.1093/database/baaa015] or computational methods [@doi:10.1016/j.jbi.2021.103838, @doi:10.1142/9789811215636_0041; @doi:10.1186/s12911-019-0938-1]. (Figure[@fig:3]a)
KGs may include links (also called edges) or nodes that are specific to the rare disease of interest (e.g., an FDA approved treatment would be a specific disease-compound edge in the KG) as well as edges that are more generalized (e.g., gene-gene interactions noted in the literature for a different disease). (Figure {@fig:4}a)

Rare disease researchers can repurpose general (i.e., not rare disease-specific) biological or chemical knowledge graphs to answer rare disease-based research questions [@doi:10.1142/9789811215636_0041]. 
There are a variety of tactics to sift through the large amounts of complex data in knowledge graphs.
One such tactic is to calculate the distances between nodes of interest (e.g., diseases and drugs to identify drugs for repurposing in rare disease [@doi:10.1142/9789811215636_0041]); this is often done by determining the "embeddings" (linear representations of the position and connections of a particular point in the graph) for nodes in the knowledge graph, and calculating the similarity between these embeddings. 
Effective methods to calculate node embeddings that can generate actionable insights for rare diseases is an active area of research [@doi:10.1142/9789811215636_0041].

Another application of KGs is to augment or refine a dataset [@doi:10.1186/s12911-019-0752-9, doi:10.1186/s12911-019-0938-1].
For example, Li et. al.[@doi:10.1186/s12911-019-0938-1] used a KG to identify linked terms in a medical corpus from a large number of patients, some with rare disease diagnoses.
They were able to augment their text dataset by identifying related terms in the clinical text to map them to the same term - e.g., mapping "cancer" and "malignancy" in different patients to the same clinical concept. 
With this augmented and improved dataset, they were able to train and test a variety of text classification algorithms to identify rare disease patients within their corpus. (Figure [@fig:4]b)

Finally, another possible tactic for rare disease researchers is to take a knowledge graph, or an integration of several knowledge graphs, and apply neural network-based algorithms optimized for graph data, such as a graph convolutional neural network.
Rao and colleagues [@doi:10.1186/s12920-018-0372-8] describe the construction of a KG using phenotype information (Human Phenotype Ontology) and rare disease information (Orphanet) and curated gene interaction/pathway data (Lit-BM-13, WikiPathways) [@doi:10.1093/nar/gkaa1043; @doi:10.1016/j.cell.2014.10.050; @doi: 10.1093/nar/gkaa1024]. 
They then trained a spectral graph convolution neural network on this KG to identify and rank potentially causal genes for the rare diseases from Orphanet, and were able to use this model to accurately predict causal genes for a ground truth dataset of rare diseases with known causal genes. 
While several groups have already published on the use of KGs to study rare diseases, we expect that the growth of multi-modal datasets and methods to analyze KGs will make them a more popular and important tool in the application of ML in rare disease. 

![Application of knowledge graphs can improve machine learning in rare disease. a) Knowledge graphs integrate different data types (e.g., genetic, functional, clinical, chemical, and ontological data) and may allow models to learn from connections that are rare disease-specific or happen in many biomedical contexts. There are a variety of possible applications of this approach, including identifying new disease-drug relationships [@doi:10.1142/9789811215636_0041], augmenting data to improve accuracy of models trained on the data [@doi:10.1186/s12911-019-0752-9, doi:10.1186/s12911-019-0938-1], or mining prior knowledge to discover important gene sets and pathways in rare diseases [@doi:10.1186/s12920-018-0372-8].  b) Knowledge graphs can also be used to augment data. Li et. al. [@doi:10.1186/s12911-019-0938-1] applied a classifier to an EHR corpus to identify rare disease patients. They trained a classifier on the EHR data alone (e.g., thrombocytopenia, anemia) and trained another classifier on data augmented with medically-related concepts from a knowledge graph (e.g., neutropenia, stroke). The classifier trained on knowledge-graph augmented data has lower error and higher accuracy (right panel). ](images/figures/pdfs/figure-4-KG.png){#fig:4}

Another approach that builds on prior knowledge and large volumes of related data is transfer learning.
Transfer learning leverages shared features, e.g., normal developmental processes that are aberrant in disease or an imaging anomaly present in both rare and common diseases, to advance our understanding of rare diseases. 
Transfer learning, where a model trained for one task or domain (source domain) is applied to another related task or domain (target domain), can be supervised or unsupervised. 
Among various types of transfer learning, feature-representation-transfer approaches learn representations from the source domain and apply them to a target domain [@doi:10.1109/tkde.2009.191](Figure [@fig:5]a-c).
That is, representation learning, as discussed in an earlier section, does not need to be applied only to describe the dataset on which the algorithm was trained – it can also be used to elucidate signals in sufficiently similar data (Figure [@fig:5]c) and may offer an improvement in descriptive capability over models trained on small rare disease datasets alone (Fig [@fig:5]c).
For instance, low-dimensional representations can be learned from tumor transcriptomic data and transferred to describe patterns associated with genetic alterations in cell line data [@doi:10.1186/s13059-020-02021-3](Figure [@fig:5]c).
In the next section, we will summarize specific instances of applying transfer learning, along with other techniques described herein, to the study of rare diseases.

![Feature-representation-transfer approaches learn representations from a source domain and apply them to a target domain. a) Combination of features representing samples of a large dataset (transcriptomic data from tumors) are learned by an ML model through representation learning.  b) When applied to a small cell line dataset, the representations extracted by an ML model tend to be incomplete and correlate poorly with clinical or drug sensitivity features. c) When a representation learning model trained on the large dataset (a) is applied to the small cell line dataset to extract consistent combinations of features based on the combinations found in the larger training dataset, the extracted representations correlate strongly with the clinical or drug sensitivity features ](images/figures/pdfs/figure-5-transfer-learning.png){#fig:5}
