## Outlook

Throughout this perspective, we highlighted various challenges in applying ML methods to rare disease data as well as examples of approaches that address these challenges.
Small sample size, while significant, is not the only roadblock towards application of ML in rare disease data.
The high dimensionality of modern data requires creative approaches, such as learning new representations of the data, to manage the curse of dimensionality.
Leveraging prior knowledge and transfer learning methods to appropriately interpret data is also required.
Furthermore, we posit that researchers applying machine learning methods on rare disease data should use techniques that increase confidence (i.e., bootstrapping) and penalize complexity of the resultant models (i.e., regularization) to enhance the generalizability of their work. 
Beyond rare disease, the approaches described in the previous sections may also be useful in the context of other areas where a paucity of data makes analysis difficult, such as precision medicine applications in which customized treatment plans are developed for an individual patient's unique genotype and phenotype.
It should be noted that there are multiple statistical techniques that were not in the scope of this article (e.g. hierarchical models, Bayesian frameworks, association tests)[@pmid:26924528; @pmid:21737059; @pmid:25502226; @pmid:28669401], but rare disease researchers are encouraged to explore them and utilize the technical principles to enhance accuracy and generalizability of the models they build.

All of the approaches highlighted in this perspective come with weaknesses that may undermine investigators' confidence in using these techniques for rare disease research.
We believe that the challenges in applying ML to rare disease are opportunities to improve data generation and method development going forward.
In particular, we have identified the following two areas as important for the field to explore to increase the utility of machine learning in rare disease.

### Intentional data generation and sharing mechanisms are key for powering the future of rare disease data analysis

While there are many techniques to collate rare data from different sources, low-quality data may hurt the end goal even if it increases the size of the dataset.
In our experience, collaboration with domain experts has proved to be critical in gaining insight into potential sources of variation in the datasets.
An anecdotal example from the authors' personal experience: conversations with a rare disease clinician revealed that samples in a particular tumor dataset were collected using vastly different surgical techniques (laser ablation and excision vs standard excision).
This information was not readily available to non-experts, but was obvious to the clinician. 
Such instances underline the fact that continuous collaboration with domain experts and the sharing of well-annotated data is needed to generate robust datasets in the future.

In addition to sample scarcity, there is a dearth of comprehensive phenotypic-genotypic databases in rare disease.
Rare disease studies that collect genomic and phenotypic data are becoming more common [@doi:10.1038/nrg3555; @doi:10.1038/nrg.2017.116; @doi:10.1056/NEJMra1711801].
An important next step is to develop comprehensive genomics-based genotype-phenotype databases that prioritize clinical and genomics data standards in order to fuel interpretation of features extracted using ML methods, possibly by funding or otherwise fostering collaboration between biobanking projects and patient registry initiatives. 
Mindful sharing of data with proper metadata and attribution to enable prompt data reuse is important in building datasets that can be of great value in rare disease [@https://www.nature.com/articles/s41576-020-0257-5].
Finally, federated learning methods, such as those used in mobile health [@doi:10.1038/s41746-020-00323-1] and electronic healthcare records studies [@doi:10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2021.24946], may allow researchers to develop ML models on data from larger numbers of people with rare diseases whilst protecting patient privacy. 

### Methods that reliably support mechanistic interrogation of specific rare diseases are an unmet need

The majority of ML methods for rare disease that we have investigated are applied to classification tasks. 
We found very few examples of methodologies that interrogate biological mechanisms of rare diseases. 
This is likely a consequence of a dearth of methods that can tolerate the various constraints imposed by rare disease data as discussed throughout this article.
An intentional push towards developing methods or analytical workflows that address this will be critical in applying machine learning approaches to rare disease data.

Method development with rare disease applications in mind requires the developers to bear the responsibility of ensuring that the resulting model is trustworthy.
The field of natural language processing has a few examples of how this can be achieved [@doi:10.18653/v1/N16-3020, @doi:10.18653/v1/P19-1073].
One way to increase trust in a developed model is by helping users understand the behavior of the developed model through providing explanations regarding why a certain model made certain predictions [@doi:10.18653/v1/N16-3020].
Another approach is to provide robust _error analysis_ for newly developed models to help users understand the strengths and weaknesses of a model [@doi:10.18653/v1/P19-1073; @https://www.mitpressjournals.org/doi/abs/10.1162/COLI_a_00072; @doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/bth060].
Adoption of these approaches into biomedical ML is quickly becoming necessary as machine learning approaches become mainstream in research and clinical settings.

Finally, methods that can reliably integrate disparate datasets will likely always remain a need in rare disease research. 
To facilitate such analyses in rare disease, methods that rely on finding structural correspondence between datasets ("anchors") may be able to transform the status-quo of using machine learning methods in rare disease [@https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W06-1615; @https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.5555/2283516.2283652; @doi:10.1016/j.cell.2019.05.031].
We speculate that this is an important and burgeoning area of research, and we are optimistic about the future of applying machine learning approaches to rare diseases.
