## Box 1: Common uses for machine learning in rare disease:

### (a) Diagnostic decision support (DDS)

DDS refers to the use of ML to identify features in high dimensional data that correlate strongly with a patient or sample phenotype to support a doctor's diagnosis. 
For example, supervised ML models can be trained on electronic health records, genetic data, or medical images to identify potential new patients with a rare disease.

### (b) Drug discovery or repurposing 

ML can help identify potential drug candidates for rare diseases. 
For example, unsupervised and supervised algorithms trained on genetic and molecular data from high throughput screens can identify novel therapeutic targets for a rare disease.
Additionally, algorithms utilizing knowledge graphs, genomic data, and databases of existing approved drugs can identify potential therapeutic candidates for rare diseases.

### (c) Clinical trial design improvement

Optimized study design and identification of appropriate trial participants can greatly reduce costs while increasing the likelihood of successful outcomes for clinical trials.
ML approaches can benefit clinical trial study design.
For example, unsupervised ML approaches can be used to identify sub-groups of patients who are more likely to respond well to a particular treatment.
Supervised ML approaches can be used to predict drug response in rare disease patients.

### (d) Molecular subtyping of disease

Rare diseases often show overlapping and heterogenous phenotypes.
ML approaches can be used to identify molecular subtypes of the disease for better understanding.
For example, unsupervised ML approaches can help identify new subtypes of a rare disease using molecular and genetic data.
The same approaches can help identify the important molecular features that define the subtypes.

### (e) Patient prognosis prediction

Rare diseases can suffer from lack of in-depth understanding of disease mechanism. 
Biomarkers or clinical features that correlate strongly with adverse outcomes can be beneficial in predicting prognosis of a patient.
Supervised ML algorithms can be useful in identifying factors contributing to risk of adverse outcomes or progression to advanced disease in rare disease patients.
Patient stratification can help identify patient subpopulations who can benefit by early and aggressive interventions. 
