# Classification in the Presence of Label Noise: a Survey

[@doi:10.1109/tnnls.2013.2292894]

Frénay and Verleysen (2014) define and describe sources of label noise, consequences of label noise on ML model development, and techniques that can help mitigate the resulting issues. 
It also suggests few quality metrics that may be used to test newly developed models to understand their performance in presence of noisy data.

# Random Forests

[@doi:10.1023/a:1010933404324]

Breiman (2007) describes the theory underlying random forest algorithm which is a popular ML method with applications in almost every high-dimensional data field, including medicine and life sciences. 
The paper also highlights the behavior of random forests in the presence of data where each individual feature is not strong enough to distinguish between classes (weak inputs). 
This scenario is frequently encountered in biomedical data and especially rare disease data.

# Deriving disease modules from the compressed transcriptional space embedded in a deep autoencoder

[@doi:10.1038/s41467-020-14666-6]

Dwivedi, et. al. (2020) apply representation learning to meaningfully group genes into modules in a data-driven manner. 
The authors turned the deep neural network into a "glass-box" by layering knowledge-based interpretation on the gene modules identified using a variational autoencoder to provide insights into what each layer of their model represent.

# Pathway-level information extractor (PLIER) for gene expression data

[@doi:10.1038/s41592-019-0456-1]

Mao and colleagues (2019) use the principles of representation learning combined with prior-knowledge to develop a model that capitalizes on correlated gene expression to identify meaningful biological pathways and reduce noise in data introduced due to technical variation.
This method has been the foundation of mutiple recent works applying ML on rare disease gene expression data.

# Automatic detection of rare pathologies in fundus photographs using few-shot learning

[@doi:10.1016/j.media.2020.101660]

Quellec, et. al. (2020) train a convolutional neural network (CNN) to identify rare pathologies in retinal images.
They used an approach called few-shot learning, in which the CNN is trained on a large cohort of retinal images and then trained on a very small number of examples of retinal images with rare pathologies.

# A Literature-Based Knowledge Graph Embedding Method for Identifying Drug Repurposing: Opportunities in Rare Diseases

[@doi:10.1142/9789811215636_0041]

Sosa and colleages (2020) develop a knowledge graph of drug, disease, and gene relationships from pubished medical literature. 
They then use a graph embedding method to explore the knowledge graph and predict drug repurposing opportunities. 
